Hello again.
In this video, we are going to look at the unique_lock class. In the last video, we looked at the lock
guard.
If we create a lock_guard instance, then it will automatically release the look at the end of the scope, even if
the function returns due to an exception or a break or an early return.
The problem is that the unlock does not occur until the end of the scope.
If we have some code which is not critical but is in the same scope, such as this sleep, for example,
then the mutex will remain locked while we execute that code.
And while this is locked, no other thread can execute the critical region.
So we are holding up the rest of the threads.
One way to address this: we could put the lock_guard into its own scope within the critical region,
and then this code does not get executed until the mutex has been released.
So just to prove that that works...
Good!
When it comes down to the basics, unique_lock and lock_guard do the same thing. The constructor
will take a mutex and lock it and the destructor will unlock
the mutex. unique_lock also has an unlock() member function so we can call that after the critical region
to avoid the problem of blocking other threads while doing non-critical work.
If the function returns before calling unlock(), then the unique_lock destructor will ensure that
the mutex is unlocked.
If it does return normally and we unlock the mutex, then the destructor will check.
It will see that the mutex has already been unlocked and it will not unlock it twice, which is a very
bad thing to do.
So let's see how this works.
So we create a unique lock...
OK.
And then after we execute the critical region, we unlock it. lk dot unlock.
So let's see how that works.
Yep, there we go. Again, we have no unwanted blocking. So that is what we do, we create the unique_lock
instance and then we unlock it after the critical region.
unique_lock has more to it than the unlock() member function.
There is also quite a variety of different ways in which you can construct it.
The way that we constructed just called the lock member function on the mutex, which is the default.
You can also try to get the lock, but not wait for it.
There are also some options with time outs.
You can try to get the lock for a certain amount of time.
So if you can not get it within half a second, for the sake of argument, then you give up.
You can also wait until a certain point in time, so if it is 11.34 seconds past
the minute, you can wait until it is 12 minutes
exactly.
You can even not lock the mutex at all, which presumably means that you want to lock it later on.
In effect, you can also have move semantics, the caller can give you a mutex that is already locked
and you acquire ownership of that lock on the mutex.
There are some second arguments we can give to the constructor for this. The defer_lock argument
will prevent the mutex from being locked immediately.
We can call lock() later on.
We can also call the global lock() function with the unique lock instance as an argument.
If we pass the adopt_lock argument, then the object will take ownership of a mutex that is already
locked.
As with double unlocking, double locking is very bad unless you have a recursive mutex, which we will
look at a bit later.
And try_lock will call the try_lock member function instead of lock. You may be wondering with
these versions that do not lock the mutex immediately, how does that work?
How do you know if it has been locked or not?
The answer is that there's a member function owns_lock() and you can call that later on to check if the mutex
has been locked.
As with many of the classes in the concurrency library, unique_lock instances cannot be copied, but
they can be moved. So we can get a lock on a mutex and transfer it to a different unique_lock instance.
Although that can only be done within the same thread.
This gives us the opportunity of writing something which follows the factory design pattern. We can
write a function which creates a lock and returns it, and the type of lock that it will create will depend
on its arguments.
So we could have locks on different types of mutex.
Or we could have different types of look.
The caller of the function will now own that lock and will be responsible for unlocking it, or they
can just let it go out of scope.
So we now know about quite a few different lock objects.
Which one of these should we use?
Well, unique_lock is the most powerful, but it has the most overhead.
So I would recommend using the lock_guard if you just want to lock a single
mutex to the end of the scope.
If you want to lock more than one mutex to the end of the scope, then use scoped_lock.
Only use unique_lock if you need the extra features or if you need to unlock within the scope.
OK, so that's it for this video. Next time, I think, we are going to learn more about mutexes, but until
then, keep coding!